[[← back]](README.md)

# Overview
The following is a general overview of the project's structure.


## Contents
- [Decompiled Code](#decompiled-code)
- [Extracted Code](#extracted-code)
- [Tools](#tools)


## Decompiled Code
Decompiled C and assembly code (finished and unfinished) can be found under the `src`, `include`, and `asm` directories.

### src
The `src` directory contains all of the decompiled C implementation files (`.c` files). Each file (excluding DLL code) is mapped from a specific address range in the base ROM via splat. These files are generally stubbed out by splat when a new address range is marked as C code and contain `GLOBAL_ASM` pragmas that include the original assembly code (in order) for each function in the file. When a function is fully decompiled and matching, the `GLOBAL_ASM` pragma is removed.

#### DLLs
The `src/dlls` directory is special. Dinosaur Planet uses a unique DLL system. Each directory under `dlls` is named after the DLL number it is for. Inside each DLL directory is:
- A single C file for the full implementation of that DLL.
- An `exports.s` file which defines the DLL's export table.
- A `.yaml` file that configures how the DLL should be extracted and recompiled.
- A `syms.txt` file that defines addresses for known symbols for that specific DLL.

Additionally, the `dlls` directory currently contains a special linker script for just DLL code.

### include
The `include` directory contains all of the C header files (`.h`) for the project as well as shared assembly files (`.inc`) that are meant to be included in a `.s` file.

#### libultra
Headers related to libultra are currently split into three directories: `PR`, `libultra`, and `libc`.
- `PR` (project reality) contains the typical headers used when developing an N64 title and only contains public variables, functions, and macros.
- `libultra` contains headers for internal libultra code that has been decompiled (typically these are taken/formatted like the existing libultra decompilation [libreultra](https://github.com/n64decomp/libreultra), however Dinosaur Planet uses a fairly modified version of libultra so not everything is the same).
- `libc` contains headers for... libc!

Additionally, the root of `include` contains the header `ultra64.h` which includes most of the `PR` headers all at once.

#### macro.inc
The `macro.inc` file is included at the top of every extracted assembly file and just contains a prelude of macros needed to reassemble those files.

#### Game code
TODO: document how headers for game systems and general code should be organized


## Extracted Code
Code and data extracted directly from the base ROM are located under the `asm` and `bin` directories respectively.

### asm
With the exception of the `nonmatchings` directory, everything under `asm` are segments of the ROM marked as assembly code that (usually) can't be decompiled into C code. The `nonmatchings` directory contains a single `.s` file for every function included from a `.c` file via `GLOBAL_ASM`. Everything under `asm` is managed directly by splat and shouldn't be modified directly.

### bin
The `bin` directory contains a `.bin` file for every ROM segment marked as generic binary data. This data could be anything from an audio file to the `.rodata` section of a file that hasn't been marked in splat yet.

The single exception to `bin` is the `bin/assets/dlls` directory, which contains individual `.dll` files for every DLL in the game unpacked directly from `DLLS.bin`.

### Symbols and Linker Scripts
The root of the repository contains various files that define symbol addresses, the configuration for splat, and the linker script used for the re-built ROM.

- `dino.ld` - The linker script generated by splat. Should not be modified directly.
- `splat.yaml` - The project configuration for splat. Here is where ROM segments are marked for extraction.
- `symbol_addrs.txt` - Defines addresses for known symbols (only those are referenced directly in assembly code).
- `undefined_funcs.txt` - Defines addresses for functions that are known but aren't referenced directly in assembly code.
- `undefined_syms.txt` - Defines addresses for symbols  that are known but aren't referenced directly in assembly code.
- `undefined_funcs_auto.txt` - Addresses of functions that splat found automatically. This file should not be modified directly.
- `undefined_syms_auto.txt` - Addresses of symbols that splat found automatically. This file should not be modified directly.
- `export_symbol_addrs.txt` - Defines symbol names for each DLLSIMPORT.tab entry. These symbols will also be found in the other symbol files and names should be kept in sync.


## Tools
The root of the repository and the `tools` directory contain many scripts and programs used as part of the build system and as utilities for decomp.

- `dino.py` - A general script for common tasks such as extracting and building the ROM as well as diffing.
- `tools/asm_differ` - Diffs assembly between the base and re-built ROM. The project configuration for asm differ can be found in `diff_settings.py` in the repository root.
- `tools/asm_processor` - Processes `GLOBAL_ASM` pragmas when compiling C code by patching in the included assembly into the resulting object file.
- `tools/build_clang_commands` - Generates a `compile_commands.json` file for `clangd`.
- `tools/ido_recomp` - Contains recompiled IDO executables to run on a modern system.
- `tools/splat` - Extracts assembly and data from the base ROM and generates the linker script for the re-built ROM.
- `tools/configure.py` - Configures the Ninja build script file (`build.ninja`) for the project.
- `tools/dino_dll.py` - Packs and unpacks the `DLLS.bin` and `DLLS_tab.bin` files.
- `tools/dll_split.py` - Like splat, but for Dinosaur Planet DLLs. Extracts assembly and data from each unpacked DLL and sets up a directory under `src/dlls` containing a C stub, the DLL's export table, and automatically discovered symbols. 
- `tools/dlldump.py` - Displays the header, relocation tables, and executable assembly for a given Dinosaur Planet `.dll` file.
- `tools/dllimports.py` - Displays and provides address/index lookup for DLLSIMPORT.tab entries.
- `tools/dlltab.py` - Displays information from the DLLS.tab file.
- `tools/elf2dll.py` - Converts a standard ELF file to the unique Dinosaur Planet DLL format.
- `tools/first-diff.py` - Find the first N differences between the base and re-built ROM.
- `tools/first_bin_diff.py` - Find the first N differences between two binary files.
- `tools/m2ctx.py` - Creates a context file for mips2c/decomp.me.
- `tools/progress.py` - Calculates the current progress of the decomp. 